if you google famous physicists you'll
be faced with a long list of people who
have contributed to our understanding of
many problems in physics over the
centuries of this entire list that comes
up on Google I found one
woman oh and also one person that wasn't
white as well that's not exactly
representative of the world we live in
but unfortunately it probably reflects
sort of the average general public's
perception of who does physics a
European study in 2014 found that when
asked to name a single female scientist
25 percent of respondents couldn't name
a single one by far the most popular
answer was Mary Curie who paid analyst
from Google before as well a double
Nobel Prize winner in both physics and
chemistry and famous for her work on
radioactivity but apparently beyond
Marie Curie even Google is hard-pressed
to name another female physicist so I
figured today I would make a list of 10
great female astrophysicists and
astronomers from history not even just
physics or science we're talking about
narrowing it down to just my own field
in astrophysics and astronomy and even
that was incredibly difficult to narrow
down to just 10 so if you think I've
missed somebody and there should be
somebody else included on my list of 10
famous astrophysicists from history then
let me know in the comments below let's
start with Laura bassy she was an
Italian physicists who lived from 1711
to 1778 and is a woman of many firsts
she was the first ever woman to achieve
a doctorate degree ie a PhD in the
sciences she was also the first woman
ever to be hired I paid to teach at a
university I'll bet you all-male classes
and the first woman to be elected to a
scientific society in 1732 her work was
focused on understanding Newton's ideas
of gravity and then also Franklin's
ideas of electricity and bringing that
work to Italy and conducting further
experiments
she really was sort of the first
trailblazer for women in
and no list would be complete without
her next up is Caroline Herschel he was
a German British astronomer who lived
from 1750 to 1848 now it was originally
her brother William Herschel that first
caught the bug for astronomy and given
the culture of gender roles at the time
she was sort of roped in to be his
assistant in that role though she was
really unhappy with all the resources
that were available to people doing
astronomy including flam Skeets famous
catalogue of stars they were in sort of
constellation order that was no use to
her instead she ended up making her own
catalogue of stars and also her own star
Atlas - all of that combined with
Williams efforts to develop better
telescopes meant that in a single year
alone she discovered three new nebulae
and eight new comets she then wrote of
those discoveries to the astronomer
royal which saw her being awarded from
the crown a salary of fifty pounds a
year so 6400 in 2020 money for her work
as Williams assistant it made her the
very first woman to be paid in a role of
government and astronomy she was also
the first woman to ever be awarded the
very prestigious and gold medal award
from the Royal Astronomical Society in
1828 this is Mary Somerville and she was
a Scottish astronomer and mathematician
who lived from 1780 to 1872 along with
Caroline Herschel together they were the
first women to be elected to the Royal
Astronomical Society in 1835 her most
famous work is mechanism of the heavens
in which she lays out the mathematics
underpinning the workings of the solar
system building on Newton and the places
work but also crucially translating that
from the language of mathematics into
common language as well I guess a woman
after my own heart with this
understanding she was among the
scientists that actually predicted that
there should be another planet beyond
the orbit of Uranus because of its
strange orbit
she lives in 1842 four years before
Neptune was ever discovered
she has an asteroid a crater on the moon
and even an Oxford College named after
her as well as being featured on the
Scottish 20 pound banknotes next up
Annie jump cannon who was in
American astrophysicist who lived from
1863 to 1941 she worked at Harvard
College Observatory as a computer one of
the many women who were hired to sort
through and catalog the endless amount
of images the observatory took they
essentially did the brunt work the
repetitive tedious kind that we get
computers to do for us today the
director of the observatory
Edward Pickering actually set her the
task of classifying all the stars in the
sky over a certain brightness she ended
up classifying more than anyone in the
world has ever done before
there was 350,000 stars come was there
wasn't really any agreed way to classify
stars at the time and so she invented
her own classification system based on
what elements were present in the
spectrum of fingerprint of light from
That star she classified stars as either
oh the a F G K or M stars and published
a system in 1901 it's a system that's
still in use today with many an
astronomy student taught the famous
Manama k-- OB a fine girl kiss me to
remember the order thing as though that
classification scheme is called the
Harvard classification scheme and not
the jump cannon classification scheme
next up this is Henrietta Swan Leavitt
she was an American astrophysicist who
lived from 1868 to 1921 she was actually
a colleague of Annie jump cannon at
Harvard College Observatory and both of
them were death the work that she was
assigned by Edward Pickering was to
catalogue all of the variable stars this
time in the small Magellanic Cloud which
is sort of a little dwarf galaxy around
the Milky Way what she noticed while
doing this work was that there was a
correlation between the period that
these stars pulsed at and how bright
they were making the assumption that all
the stars in the small Magellanic Cloud
were about the same distance away from
us
she deduced there must be some sort of
correlation between the intrinsic
brightness of a star that is variable
and the period which it pulses at now
this was published in 1912 under Edward
Pickering's name but thankfully in the
very first line of
paper it makes it clear that it is
Henrietta leave its work now this
correlation is important because it
means that if you can measure the period
that one of these stars pulsates at then
you know how bright it should be
comparing that with the brightness that
it appears to be to you you can
therefore get its distance the thing is
they didn't know the distance to the
small magellanic cloud at the time to
actually be able to calibrate that and
to wait until that was measured
separately using a method called
parallax but once that happened and
leave its law had been calibrated it
could be used to find the distance to
many different types of variable stars
including by Edwin Hubble to find the
distance to Andromeda and prove that
actually Andromeda wasn't a spiral
nebula in our own Milky Way galaxy but
actually a galaxy in its own right a
result that unfortunately Henrietta
Leavitt did not live to see but would
not have been possible if not for her
work next up Cecilia Payne who is a
British American astrophysicist who
lived from 1900 to 1979 she went to
Cambridge University in 1919 to study
physics and chemistry but was never
actually awarded a degree because
although Cambridge allowed women to
attend it didn't actually award a
certificate degree to women until 1948
after she graduated she realized that in
the UK the only opportunity for her was
to become a teacher and so instead she
moved to the US again to Harvard College
Observatory where the new director
Harlow Shapley had actually set up a
graduate program for women at the
Radcliffe observatory and so she became
the first woman to earn a PhD at
Radcliffe College in 1925 her PhD thesis
was all about the composition of the Sun
ie what is the Sun made of even many
years looking at the spectra of light
the fingerprint of light from the Sun
and concluded that it must be made of
hydrogen and helium the idea was
dismissed though by the academic
community including her thesis reviewer
Henry Russell because it was against the
accepted hypothesis at the
that the earth and Sun were made of very
similar Thanks
course Henry Russell then went on four
years later to do a similar experiment
found the same thing as Celia Payne he
published a paper on it where he said as
much but also reference
Celia Payne's earlier work and yet still
it's Henry Russell that is often
mistakenly credited for that result next
in the list is Margaret Burbage who is a
British American astrophysicist
who lived from 1919 to 2020 she was the
first author on a paper in 1957 that
completely changed how we understand
stars it stated that all elements in the
universe are created in side stars a
process that we call nucleosynthesis so
that often parodied phrase of you know
we're all made from Stardust essentially
comes from Margaret Burbidge --is work
she also went on to study quasars
discovering the most distant
astronomical object known at the time
she also helped to develop the faint
object spectrograph on the Hubble Space
Telescope an instrument that has been
used for many a scientific result since
it was launched on top of all that she
was made director of the Royal Greenwich
Observatory in London and elected the
first female president of the American
Astronomical Society
all the while campaigning against the
discrimination both positive and
negative of women in the sciences then
we have Veera Reuben who is an American
astrophysicist who lived from 1928 to
2016 during her PhD at Georgetown
University
she studied galaxies and found that they
like to clump together in the universe
again this was dismissed by the academic
community at the time is a very
controversial idea but now underpins our
entire understanding of the structure of
the universe after that very
controversial work of a PhD she sort of
wanted a little bit of a quieter
scientific life so decided to study
something that should have been fairly
straightforward she decided to look at
the speed at which stars are moving or
orbiting around the
center of a galaxy it was thought they
should be moving in a very similar
pattern to what we see in the solar
system where planets close in orbit the
Sun much faster than planets further out
but Rubin found that the stars on the
outskirts were orbiting just as fast as
stars towards the center suggesting that
unlike the solar system where the
majority of the mass is concentrated in
the center in the Sun the majority of
mass in galaxies must therefore be on
the outskirts despite the fact that the
outskirts of galaxies are much fainter I
have a lot less stars than the Centers
of galaxies this was one of the first
pieces of observational evidence for the
theory of dark matter first proposed by
Fritz Zwicky in the 1930s
Ruben's work concluded that galaxies
must contain at least 5 to 10 times more
Dark Matter than they did normal matter
that was visible in stars and dust and
gas a result that's been confirmed over
the past 50 years by a plethora of
evidence supporting it in 1996 because
of her work she then became only the
second woman ever to win that
prestigious gold medal awarded by the
Royal Astronomical Society a hundred and
sixty-eight years after Caroline
Herschel first won it in 1828 next up is
Gladys West an American mathematician
and space scientist born in 1930 she got
her master's in mathematics in 1955 from
Virginia State University before she was
hired by a naval research base to
analyze satellite data and it was there
that she found her passion for
mathematically modeling the orbits of
satellites and subsequently planets it
was that knowledge that proved
invaluable to a 1960s study that
actually showed that Pluto's orbit was
actually tied to Neptune's something we
call resonance during the 1970s and 80s
she worked once again with satellite
data but this time modeling the shape of
the earth and the Earth's surface she
modeled it as what's called an ellipsoid
a slightly squashed ball taking into
account the forces of gravity and tidal
forces that were act
on it at any one time that work formed
the basis of GPS the global positioning
service that we now use what every
single day as was the way though for
many african-american women working in
the sciences throughout the 20th century
her work went largely unacknowledged she
was finally recognized though as one of
those hidden figures by the US Air Force
in 2018 when she was inducted into their
Hall of Fame next up we have Dame
Jocelyn Bell Burnell who is a Northern
Irish astrophysicist who was born in
1943 during a PhD at Cambridge in 1967
while she was using radio telescopes to
study quasars she ended up discovering a
strange radio source that would pulsate
I give out sort of a little pulse of
radio waves every one and a third second
this source was first dubbed lgm1 by
Bell Burnell
and her PhD supervisor Anthony Hewish as
a joke that it could be alien
civilizations ie little green men LG M
but that hypothesis was quickly
dismissed by Bell Burnell herself after
she discovered a second
similarly pulsating radio source at a
different part of the sky
not long after after Bell Burnell
announced this result Fred Hoyle
actually identified ur is fitting with
the hypothesis of a rotating neutron
star what were eventually dubbed pulsars
now the Nobel Prize in Physics in 1974
was awarded for contributions to radio
astronomy and the understanding of
pulsars it went to Martin rile and
Anthony Hewish Jocelyn Bell Burnell
supervisor but not to Jocelyn Bell
Burnell a decision which still causes a
bit of controversy to this day however
in 2018 she was awarded the special
breakthrough prize in fundamental
physics worth three million dollars for
this discovery of radio pulsars but she
very quickly donated all of that money
to set up a scholarship fund for women
minority ethnic and refugee students who
wish to become physics researchers she's
now a visiting professor at Oxford in
he has an office just down the hall from
me it's one of the many many privileges
in my life that I am so grateful for so
there you have it the ten historic a
famous female astrophysicist that I
somehow managed to narrow it down to
because that was just astrophysics we
could have covered all of physics night
would have been even harder to narrow it
down and he even couldn't have just
focused on the historic sleep famous
astrophysicist I could have talked about
people that work in astrophysics today
then we could have had people like Maria
NGO Pat Maher Shan Hsiung whoo Willy
Hobbs more Shirley Ann Jackson Mary G
Ross Fabiola Gianotti
Debra I Aki Maria Kirsch Hwang Jini
Margaret Palmer Svetlana Gerasimenko
Miriam Shadid Shuang Tama Maggie
ed Arun Pocock Sandeep favor Jedediah
iyslah Priya natera Jean Ashlee Spindler
Colleen hoon Meg Yuri and even with the
all of these editions this completely
non exhaustive list there's still people
that can't name even a single female
scientist apparently I mean I do see
this reflected in my comments on my
videos as well I see people commenting
saying they are surprised delighted but
also surprised that they found a female
astrophysicist the website true sci-fi
list 209 female astrophysicists alone as
two hundred nine of us talking about our
work on a public forum every single day
and yet people are still surprised and
hopefully that link in this video will
go some way towards challenging that
surprise that pervades the public psyche
so that next time that the survey done
asking the public to name
any female scientist we were already
with at least 10 that you can name right
off the bat yeah will recognize it
because of the manometer it's manam ik
manam ik well stupid word next up is
GLaDOS West an American well nice is one
of those hidden figures by the US Air
Force when she was abducted she was
abducted after they're all afraid
Jesus so there's the 10 historically
famous female astraphobia famous
feminist can't even say my own title Oh
you where man and throw your hands up at
me oh I didn't know you could size like
that darling how you science you science
like that